<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Notes to the Preface of the Fifth Edition</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="frontmatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="preface-2" epub:type="preface">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Notes to the Preface of the Fifth Edition</h2>
			<p>The First Edition of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Scrambles amongst the Alps</i> appeared in the summer of <time datetime="1871">1871</time>, and the Second Edition in the autumn of the same year. In <time datetime="1879">1879</time>, a Third (condensed) Edition was published, under the title <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Ascent of the Matterhorn</i>. The book then remained out of print for twelve years. In the Fourth Edition (<time datetime="1893">1893</time>) the matter which was omitted in the Third one was restored; the text was revised generally; corrections which had become necessary in consequence of the lapse of years were made; and, in the Appendix, the <a href="appendix-c.xhtml">History of the Matterhorn</a> was brought down to date.</p>
			<p>Amongst changes and developments which are not noted in the narrative, it may be mentioned that an Inn at Lognan has replaced the chalets, and that there is another one at Prerayen, in addition to the old buildings. A <i xml:lang="fr">cabane</i> has been opened at Chanrion. A new Inn (Hôtel des Jumeaux) has been put up at Breuil, and the Albergo del Monte Cervino at Giomein has been enlarged. The building on the summit of the Col Théodule, which was formerly termed ‘the hut’, is now called Pavillon du Col <abbr>St.</abbr> Théodule.</p>
			<p>The Maps have been re-engraved, on copper. That of the Matterhorn and its Glaciers is after the Siegfried Map of Switzerland, with such additions as are needful to adapt it to the text. The Map of the Chain of Mont Blanc is based on the Survey of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Capt.</abbr> Mieulet, the map by <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Adams-Reilly, and the Carte Dufour, but numerous corrections and additions have been made from personal observation. The Map of the Valley of Valpelline, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, has been constructed from the new Italian Official Map, the survey by <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Reilly, and the Carte Dufour.</p>
			<section id="preface-2-1">
				<header>
					<p>Early Ascents of the Aiguilles d’Arve</p>
				</header>
				<p>In the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">Annuaire</i> of the Club Alpin Français published in <time datetime="1899">1899</time> there is an article by <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Fodéré upon the Aiguilles d’Arve. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Fodéré has ascended both the Southern and the Central Aiguilles, and says he found by levelling that the Southern Aiguille is the higher of the two. He also gives the name of a person (Célestin Bellet) who made an ascent of the Central Aiguille in <time datetime="1845">1845</time>, and the name of another person (Elie Savoye) who did the same before <time datetime="1864">1864</time>. In the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Alpine Journal</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xviii</span>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 165–8, there is a reference to an ascent of the Central Aiguille which was made in <time datetime="1839">1839</time>. These were probably the excursions which were referred to by <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mons.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">Ad.</abbr> Joanne, about which both I and my companions were perhaps unduly sceptical. See <a href="chapter-8.xhtml#chapter-8-page-169">Chapter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VIII</span></a>. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Fodéré’s article came under my notice after the sheets of <a href="chapter-8.xhtml"><abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VIII</span>.</a> were worked off.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="preface-2-2">
				<header>
					<p>The Death of Christian Almer</p>
				</header>
				<p>Most of the characters mentioned in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Scrambles</i> have now departed. One of the last to go was my old Guide and Friend Christian Almer. This ideal mountain-guide celebrated the 70th anniversary of his birthday by making an ascent of the Wetterhorn along with his Wife, who was then aged 72; and from this display of vigour when threescore and ten he might have been expected to have lived much longer. To my great regret, he died on <time datetime="1898-05-17">May 17, 1898</time>, aged 72. See the <a href="chapter-18.xhtml#illustration-102">illustration</a> in Chapter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XIIX</span>, and the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Alpine Journal</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xviii</span>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 185–6.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="preface-2-3">
				<header>
					<p>Changes on the Southern Side of the Matterhorn</p>
				</header>
				<p>In <time datetime="1895-08">August, 1895</time>, I ascended the south-west ridge as far as the base of the Great Tower, to photograph places in which I was interested. More than thirty years had elapsed since my last visit, and I found that great changes had taken place in the interval. The summit of the Col du Lion was lower than it was formerly, from diminution of the snow; and the passage across it was shorter than it used to be. For the next 150 feet or so of ascent there was little alteration, but thence upwards the ridge had tumbled to pieces, and many familiar places were unrecognizable. No spot on this ridge is more firmly fixed in my recollection than ‘the Chimney.’ [See the <a href="chapter-5.xhtml#illustration-41">illustration</a> in Chapter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>.] Only a remnant of it was left—more than half of the Chimney had disappeared; and from that point upwards everything was altered. Difficult places had become easy, and easy places had become difficult. The angle in which a thick knotted rope is now dangling, which is one of the steepest bits of the ascent, did not exist in <time datetime="1864">1864</time>.</p>
				<p>The first Refuge on the southern side of the Matterhorn was made on the ledge called the ‘cravate’ [see <a href="appendix-c.xhtml#appendix-c-cabane-cravate">Appendix C</a>]. Later on, a <i xml:lang="fr">cabane</i> was built close to the base of the Great Tower. Its life seeming precarious, a third refuge, another <i xml:lang="fr">cabane</i>, was erected in <time datetime="1893">1893</time> about 160 feet lower down, and came into use in <time datetime="1894">1894</time>. This latter hut occupies very nearly the position of my third tent-platform. A view of it is given in <abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II.</span> of my <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Guide to Zermatt and the Matterhorn</i>, after photographs taken in <time datetime="1895">1895</time>.</p>
				<p>In <a href="chapter-5.xhtml#chapter-5-great-tower">Chapter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span></a>, I characterize the Great Tower as ‘one of the most striking features on the ridge.’ In <time datetime="1864">1864</time>, there were no signs of decay about the base of this huge pinnacle. In <time datetime="1895">1895</time> it seemed to me that it would not be long before it would collapse. Woe betide those who may be beneath the Great Tower when it falls.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="preface-2-4">
				<header>
					<p>Carrel’s Gallery</p>
				</header>
				<p>By reference to <a href="appendix-c.xhtml#appendix-c-page-403">this section in Appendix C</a>, it will be seen that Jean-Antoine Carrel, upon his <em>descent</em> of the Matterhorn, on <time datetime="1865-07-17">July 17, 1865</time>, came down at one part of the way by a somewhat easier route than that which was taken upon the ascent. The opinion of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Craufurd Grove about this ‘somewhat easier route’ will be found <a href="appendix-c.xhtml#appendix-c-craufurd-grove">later in Appendix C</a>. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Grove was the first tourist to ascend the Matterhorn on the Italian side; and, so far as I am aware, no one again went that way until <time datetime="1895-08"><abbr>Aug.</abbr> 1895</time>, when <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W. E.</abbr> Davidson, with the guides Daniel Maquignaz and Christian Klucker, made an ascent by what was generally, though perhaps not exactly, the route taken by <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Grove. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Davidson strongly endorses <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Grove’s opinion. Traces of the two previous ascents were observed by <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Davidson.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="preface-2-5">
				<header>
					<p>Exploration of the Furgg Ridge</p>
				</header>
				<p>In <time datetime="1899">1899</time>, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Sig.</abbr> Guido Rey, of Turin, undertook a very bold and enterprising exploration of the Furgg Ridge—that which leads from the Furgg Grat towards the summit of the Matterhorn. The information that <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Sig.</abbr> Rey communicated to me arrived too late to be incorporated in <a href="appendix-c.xhtml">Appendix C</a>.</p>
				<blockquote>
					<p>“I started from Breuil with Antoine Maquignaz and a porter on <time datetime="1899-08-24"><abbr>Aug.</abbr> 24, 1899</time>, at one o’clock in the night, and went to the Breuiljoch, and thence directly up the Furggen Ridge, as far as the point reached by Mummery,—which may be called ‘l’Épaule de Furggen’ At this point real difficulty begins.</p>
					<p>Meanwhile Daniel Maquignaz, with two porters and a large amount of rope, had reached the summit of the Matterhorn by the usual way; and descended about 85 metres” [280 feet] “down the Furggen Ridge, until he came to a place where the rocks became overhanging. There he stopped, and fixed a rope, and let the same down to the spot where we were standing, which was about 10 metres higher than l’Épaule de Furggen. By means of this rope, I and my men ascended about 80 metres, with great difficulty, the rocks being smooth and nearly vertical. After two hours of <i xml:lang="fr">grimpade</i>” [scrambling] “we thus arrived at the base of some overhanging rock upon which stood Daniel and his men. We were separated 12 or 15 metres from Daniel, and tried to pull ourselves up; but this was impossible on account of the great oscillation of the rope, and from there being no means of laying hold of the rock either with hands or feet. At 5 <abbr>p.m.</abbr> we gave up our attempts, and returned the way we had come; and, walking down the whole night, arrived at Breuil on the morning of the <time datetime="1899-08-25">25th of August</time>. The point reached on this attempt was distant from the summit about 105 metres” [344 feet].</p>
					<p>“I again left Breuil on the <time datetime="1899-08-28">28th</time>, and ascended the Matterhorn by the usual Italian route. Daniel, Antoine, and porters were with me, carrying a rope ladder about 15 metres long. I descended from the summit to the Furggen Ridge as far as the point previously attained by Daniel’s party, and found means of getting a few metres lower. There I fixed the ladder, and let it down the overhanging wall. Descending it, I reached the point where we arrived on the <time datetime="1899-08-25">25th of August</time>. Having completely explored the ridge, and touched every part of it, I returned immediately to the summit, and descended, in very bad weather, by the Hörnli route.”</p>
				</blockquote>
			</section>
			<section id="preface-2-6">
				<p>The following should be added to the List of Ascents of the Matterhorn given in <a href="appendix-e.xhtml">Appendix E</a>.</p>
				<table class="ascents">
					<thead>
						<tr>
							<th scope="col">Date.</th>
							<th scope="col">Names.</th>
							<th scope="col">Route taken.</th>
							<th scope="col">Remarks.</th>
						</tr>
					</thead>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<th scope="rowgroup"><time datetime="1877">1877</time>.</th>
							<td/>
							<td/>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td class="date">
								<time datetime="1877-08-06"><abbr>Aug.</abbr> 6</time>
							</td>
							<td class="names"><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Martin Conway</td>
							<td class="route">Zermatt.</td>
							<td class="remarks">Guides—<abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">P. J.</abbr> Knubel and <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">P. J.</abbr> Truffer.<br/>
							From Zermatt, and back in a day; 11¾ <abbr>hs.</abbr> walking, and 5¾ <abbr>hs.</abbr> halts (3¼ <abbr>hs.</abbr> from forced inaction due to other parties.)</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td class="date"><time datetime="1877-08-10"><abbr>Aug.</abbr> 10</time>—<time datetime="1877-08-11">11</time></td>
							<td class="names">Felix <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">O.</abbr> Schuster</td>
							<td class="route">Zermatt.</td>
							<td class="remarks">Guides—Peter Baumann and <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">P. J.</abbr> Truffer.</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<th scope="rowgroup"><time datetime="1879">1879</time>.</th>
							<td/>
							<td/>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td class="date"><time datetime="1879-08-24"><abbr>Aug.</abbr> 24</time>—<time datetime="1879-08-05">5</time></td>
							<td class="names"><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. E.</abbr> Bode</td>
							<td class="route">Zermatt.</td>
							<td class="remarks">Guide—<abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Petrus and a Porter.</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
			</section>
			<section id="preface-2-7">
				<header>
					<p>Errata</p>
				</header>
				<ul>
					<li>Page 6, in the 5th line of note, “belonging to” should read “leased to.”</li>
					<li>„ 16, 16th line from top, “they placed” should be “those placed.”</li>
					<li>„ 93, in the note, “by Mr. Conway” should be “by <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> (now Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Martin) Conway.”</li>
					<li>„ 180, line 2 from top, “Hinchcliff” should be “Hinchliff.” There is the same error in the Index.</li>
					<li>„ 408, last line, “by all those” should read “by nearly all those.”</li>
				</ul>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
